Profile comparison docs (#11598)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/profiler/compare_profiles.md

---
title: Compare Profiles
kind: documentation
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/profiler/enabling'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Enable continuous profiler for your application'
    - link: 'getting_started/profiler'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Getting Started with Profiler'
    - link: 'https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/introducing-datadog-profiling/'
      tag: 'Blog'
      text: 'Introducing always-on production profiling in Datadog'
---

> Continuous Profiler can compare two profiles or profile aggregations with each other to help you identify code performance improvements, regressions, and structural changes. You can compare a profile with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Continuous Profiler can compare two profiles or profile aggregations with each other to help you identify code performance improvements, regressions, and structural changes. You can compare a profile with:
```

> - The same profile at a different time,

Reviewer 2: 'Same profile at a different time' might be confusing, i'd suggest maybe something like:
- Profiles taken at a different time

Author: ```suggestion
- Profiles taken at a different time,
```

- An average of the service's profiles over time, or

> - Profiles with a different set of Datadog tags (for example, environment, version, or data center). 

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this formatting of a sentence across bullet points? Haven't seen us do it this way elsewhere in the docs.

Author: It was just too long as an unstructured sentence.

> - A profile with a different set of Datadog tags (for example, environment, version, or data center). 

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should say Profiles since we are aggregating a bunch of 60s profiles? So it reads... "Profiles with a different set of...."

Author: ```suggestion
- Profiles with a different set of Datadog tags (for example, environment, version, or data center). 
```

> This helps you see if the service is taking more time, using more memory, making more allocations, throwing more exceptions, or involving more or less code and calls than it was in the past.

Reviewer 2: Also helps you see "less" resource consumption (CPU, allocs etc) if you have made improvements!

Author: ```suggestion
This helps you see if the service is taking more or less time, using more or less memory, making more of fewer allocations, throwing more or fewer exceptions, or involving more or less code and calls than it was in the past.
```

> This helps you see if the service is taking more or less time, using more or less memory, making more of fewer allocations, throwing more or fewer exceptions, or involving more or less code and calls than it was in the past.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This helps you see if the service is taking more or less time, using more or less memory, making more or fewer allocations, throwing more or fewer exceptions, or involving more or less code and calls than it was in the past.
```

## Comparison scenarios

> Comparisons work best when the application is experiencing a similar workload (total requests and resource usage) as it was in the past.

Reviewer 2: I would drop resource usage from similar workload, thinking about it a bit more. Lets just say requests

Author: ```suggestion
Comparisons work best when the application is experiencing a similar workload (total requests) as it was in the past.
```

Some common scenarios to use comparison are:

- Comparing two latest deployments. For example, verify if the latest deployed fix lowers the number of memory allocations your method makes.

- Comparing two distinct time periods. For example, calculate the CPU consumption for today compared to the past week. What methods get better or worse in terms of CPU consumption?

- Comparing two different sets of tags. For example, compare profiles between different environments, availability zones, pods, canaries, or other custom Datadog tags.

## Accessing the comparison view

You can open different types of comparisons from different places in the UI. 

### Comparing a profile to a previous time period 

On the Profiler Search view, select a profile from the list. Click **Compare** to open the comparison view. By default, the selected profile is shown as Profile B. For Profile A, select an aggregation time frame and tags, or a specific profile ID. 

Select the metric you want to compare (the list varies based on code language). This can be helpful, for example, for looking at allocation spikes while investigating CPU profiles.

> {{< img src="tracing/profiling/compare_time_frames.mp4" alt="Opening the comparison view to compare a profile with a aggregation for a time frame." video="true">}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< img src="tracing/profiling/compare_time_frames.mp4" alt="Opening the comparison view to compare a profile with an aggregation for a time frame." video="true">}}
```

Take note of the legend colors, which show:

>  - Deepening shades of red for methods that are slower in profile B.

Reviewer 2: Lets replace faster and slower with "takes less time" and "takes more time" since technically those methods could be running less often during your comparison time period.

Author: ```suggestion
 - Deepening shades of red for methods that takes more time in profile B.
```

>  - Deepening shades of green for methods that are faster in profile B.

Author: ```suggestion
 - Deepening shades of green for methods that take less time in profile B.
```

Hover over methods in the profile to see specific metrics about the methods that are taking more or less time, or making fewer or more allocations, than in the compared profile.

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/compare_hover.png" alt="Hover over a method in the profile to see metrics comparison" >}}

### Comparing recent versions

On the Aggregation view, select a service to see its aggregated profile for a particular metric (for example, wall time) over the selected time frame. Then click **Compare** to compare it to the aggregated profile of another version. 

{{< img src="tracing/profiling/compare_recent_versions.mp4" alt="Opening the comparison view for two versions." video="true">}}

### Side-by-side and combined comparison views

Switch between **Side-by-Side** and **Combined** to find the view that is most helpful to you.

Side-by-side comparison is helpful when you want to retain the context of both A and B profiles. In this mode, The flame graph on the left represents profile scoped to tags and time range scoped for A while the flame graph on the right represents profile scoped to tags and time range scoped for B. 

> The methods highlighted in blue on the left flame graph show methods that do not exist in the profile B. Similarly, methods highlighted in purple show methods that exist in profile B but not in profile A. 

Reviewer 2: Instead of "methods that do not exist" should we replace with something like "methods that were not seen running during the duration that the profiles were captured or among the set of tags queried". 

This is mostly because sometimes it might be that during the scoped time period method <X> just didnt run thus didnt show up on the profile. Or it could be that a host or container scoped did not run this method during the capture duration (hence the tag bit ^)

> The methods highlighted in blue on the left flame graph show methods that were not seen running in profile B during the period that the profile was captured, or among the set of tags queried. Similarly, methods highlighted in purple show methods that were similarly not seen in profile A. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods highlighted in blue on the left flame graph show methods that were not seen running in profile B during the period that the profile was captured, or among the set of tags queried. Similarly, methods highlighted in purple show methods that were not seen in profile A. 
```
